UNIXNAME V1.0
-------------
  Unixname  is  a  little utility which installes itself in  the  GEMDOS  trap 
vector.  It then monitors all file functions and watches if filenames  contain 
'/'.  If a '/' is found,  it is then converted into a '\'.  This is especially 
useful   when   porting  Un*x-software  which  does  things   like   '#include 
<local/argparse.h>' - you don't have to change it in the sources.
  If  a program does something like 'fh = open("bind/test")',  this will  work 
while  Unixname  is installed - so remember to change this  because  otherwise 
every user would need Unixname to run that program.

Unixname watches the following GEMDOS functions:
  57 (Dcreate)
  58 (Ddelete)
  59 (Dsetpath)
  60 (Fcreate)
  61 (Fopen)
  65 (Fdelete)
  67 (Fattrib)
  75 (Pexec)
  78 (Fsfirst)
  86 (Frename)

Unixname  is distributed in source and binary form.  The program and  code  is 
copyrighted, but may be freely distributed under the following conditions:
 - The source code must be available along with the binaries. The binaries may 
   be omitted. This documentation must always be copied in an unmodified form.
 - Modified versions must be clearly marked as such. The copyright note and my 
   name may not me removed from source or binaries.  I would appreciate if you 
   send me a copy of modified versions.
 - No charge may be made other than a reasonable charge for reproduction.
 - I  am  not responsible for any consequences resulting from the use  or  the 
   inability to use this software, even if they result from defects in it.
 - The  program may be distributed together with commercial programs  if  both 
   source  and  are both distributed and if is made clear that  this program
   is public domain.

You can make  as many copies of this programs as you wish.  Give it  to
friends,  distribute it via networks or do whatever you want to do with it.

If you have any problems with this program, feel free to contact me:

Michael Schwingen
Ahornstrasse 36
W-5100 Aachen
Germany

