Executable-File Header Format (3.1)

An  executable  (.EXE)  file  for  the  Windows  operating  system  contains  a
combination of code and data or a combination of code, data, and resources. The
executable  file also  contains two  headers: an  MS-DOS header  and a  Windows
header.  The  next  two  sections  describe  these  headers;  the third section
describes the code and data contained in a Windows executable file.

MS-DOS Header

The MS-DOS  (old-style) executable-file header contains  four distinct parts: a
collection of  header information (such as  the signature word, the  file size,
and so on), a reserved section, a  pointer to a Windows header (if one exists),
and a stub program. The following illustration shows the MS-DOS executable-file
header: If the  word value at offset 18h  is 40h or greater, the  word value at
3Ch is typically  an offset to a Windows header.  Applications must verify this
for each executable-file header being tested, because a few applications have a
different header  style. MS-DOS uses the  stub program to display  a message if
Windows has not been loaded when the user attempts to run a program.

Windows Header

The Windows  (new-style) executable-file header  contains information that  the
loader requires  for segmented executable files.  This information includes the
linker  version number,  data specified  by the  linker, data  specified by the
resource compiler, tables of segment data,  tables of resource data, and so on.
The following illustration shows the Windows executable-file header:

The  following sections  describe the  entries in  the Windows  executable-file
header.

Information Block

The information block in the Windows header contains the linker version number,
the lengths  of various tables that  further describe the executable  file, the
offsets from the beginning of the header  to the beginning of these tables, the
heap and stack sizes, and so on.  The following list summarizes the contents of
the header  information block (the locations  are relative to the  beginning of
the block):

Loc     Description

00h     The signature word.  The low byte contains "N" (4Eh)  and the high byte
        contains "E" (45h).
02h     The linker version number.
03h     The linker revision number.
04h     The  offset  to  the  entry  table  (relative  to  the beginning of the
        header).
06h     The length of the entry table, in bytes.
08h     Reserved.
0Ch     Flags that describe the contents of the executable file. This value can
        be one or more of the following bits:

        Bit     Meaning

        0       The  linker  sets  this  bit  if  the executable-file format is
                SINGLEDATA. An  executable file with  this format contains  one
                data segment.  This bit is  set if the  file is a  dynamic-link
                library (DLL).
        1       The  linker  sets  this  bit  if  the executable-file format is
                MULTIPLEDATA.  An  executable  file  with  this format contains
                multiple  data segments.  This bit  is  set  if the  file is  a
                Windows application.
                If neither bit  0 nor bit 1 is  set, the executable-file format
                is  NOAUTODATA. An  executable file  with this  format does not
                contain an automatic data segment.
        2       Reserved.
        3       Reserved.
        8       Reserved.
        9       Reserved.
        11      If this  bit is set, the  first segment in the  executable file
                contains code that loads the application.
        13      If this bit is set, the  linker detects errors at link time but
                still creates an executable file.
        14      Reserved.
        15      If this bit is set, the executable file is a library module.
                If   bit  15   is  set,   the  CS:IP   registers  point  to  an
                initialization  procedure  called  with  the  value  in  the AX
                register  equal  to  the   module  handle.  The  initialization
                procedure  must execute  a far   return to  the caller.  If the
                procedure is successful, the value in AX is nonzero. Otherwise,
                the value in AX is zero. The value in the DS register is set to
                the library's data segment if  SINGLEDATA is set. Otherwise, DS
                is set  to the data segment  of the application that  loads the
                library.

0Eh     The automatic data  segment number. (0Eh is zero  if the SINGLEDATA and
        MULTIPLEDATA bits are cleared.)
10h     The initial  size, in bytes, of  the local heap. This  value is zero if
        there is no local allocation.
12h     The initial size, in bytes, of the  stack. This value is zero if the SS
        register value does not equal the DS register value.
14h     The segment:offset value of CS:IP.
18h     The segment:offset value of SS:SP.
        The value  specified in SS is  an index to the  module's segment table.
        The first entry  in the segment table corresponds  to segment number 1.
        If SS addresses the automatic data segment and SP is zero, SP is set to
        the address obtained  by adding the size of  the automatic data segment
        to the size of the stack.
1Ch     The number of entries in the segment table.
1Eh     The number of entries in the module-reference table.
20h     The number of bytes in the nonresident-name table.
22h     A relative  offset from  the beginning   of the  Windows header  to the
        beginning of the segment table.
24h     A relative  offset from  the beginning   of the  Windows header  to the
        beginning of the resource table.
26h     A relative  offset from  the beginning   of the  Windows header  to the
        beginning of the resident-name table.
28h     A relative  offset from  the beginning   of the  Windows header  to the
        beginning of the module-reference table.
2Ah     A relative  offset from  the beginning   of the  Windows header  to the
        beginning of the imported-name table.
2Ch     A relative offset  from the beginning of  the file to the  beginning of
        the nonresident-name table.
30h     The number of movable entry points.
32h     A shift count that  is used to align the logical  sector. This count is
        log2  of the  segment sector  size.  It  is typically  4, although  the
        default  count is  9. (This  value corresponds  to the  /alignment [/a]
        linker switch. When  the linker command line contains  /a:16, the shift
        count is  4. When the  linker command line  contains /a:512, the  shift
        count is 9.)
34h     The number of resource segments.
36h     The target operating system, depending on which bits are set:

        Bit     Meaning

        0       Operating system format is unknown.
        1       Reserved.
        2       Operating system is Microsoft Windows.
        3       Reserved.
        4       Reserved.

37h     Additional information about the executable file. It can be one or more
        of the following values:

        Bit     Meaning

        1       If this bit is set, the  executable file contains a Windows 2.x
                application that runs in version 3.x protected mode.
        2       If this bit is set, the  executable file contains a Windows 2.x
                application that supports proportional fonts.
        3       If this  bit is set,  the executable file  contains a fast-load
                area.

38h     The offset, in  sectors, to the beginning of  the fast-load area. (Only
        Windows uses this value.)
3Ah     The length, in sectors, of the  fast-load area. (Only Windows uses this
        value.)
3Ch     Reserved.
3Eh     The  expected  version  number  for  Windows.  (Only  Windows uses this
        value.)

Segment Table

The  segment  table  contains  information  that  describes  each segment in an
executable file.  This information includes  the segment length,  segment type,
and segment-relocation data. The following  list summarizes the values found in
the segment table (the locations are relative to the beginning of each entry):

Loc     Description

00h     The offset, in sectors, to the  segment data (relative to the beginning
        of the file). A value of zero means no data exists.
02h     The length,  in bytes, of  the segment,  in  the file. A  value of zero
        indicates that the segment length is 64K, unless the selector offset is
        also zero.
04h     Flags that describe the contents of the executable file. This value can
        be one or more of the following:

        Bit     Meaning

        0       If this bit  is set, the segment is  a data segment. Otherwise,
                the segment is a code segment.
        1       If this  bit is set,  the loader has  allocated memory for  the
                segment.
        2       If this bit is set, the segment is loaded.
        3       Reserved.
        4       If this bit is set, the segment type is MOVABLE. Otherwise, the
                segment type is FIXED.
        5       If  this bit  is set,  the segment  type is  PURE or SHAREABLE.
                Otherwise, the segment type is IMPURE or NONSHAREABLE.
        6       If this bit is set, the segment type is PRELOAD. Otherwise, the
                segment type is LOADONCALL.
        7       If  this bit  is set  and the  segment is  a code  segment, the
                segment type is EXECUTEONLY. If this bit is set and the segment
                is a data segment, the segment type is READONLY.
        8       If this bit is set, the segment contains relocation data.
        9       Reserved.
        10      Reserved.
        11      Reserved.
        12      If this bit is set, the segment is discardable.
        13      Reserved.
        14      Reserved.
        15      Reserved.

06h     The minimum allocation  size of the segment, in bytes.  A value of zero
        indicates that the minimum allocation size is 64K.

Resource Table

The resource  table describes and identifies  the location of each  resource in
the executable file.

Following are the members in the resource table:

rscAlignShift   The  alignment shift  count for  resource data.  When the shift
                count  is  used  as  an  exponent  of  2,  the  resulting value
                specifies the factor, in bytes, for computing the location of a
                resource in the executable file.
rscTypes        An array  of TTYPEINFO structures  containing information about
                resource types. There must be  one TTYPEINFO structure for each
                type of resource in the executable file.
rscEndTypes     The end of  the resource type definitions. This  member must be
                zero.
rscResourceNames  The  names (if  any) associated  with the  resources in  this
                  table. Each  name is stored  as consecutive bytes;  the first
                  byte specifies the number of characters in the name.
rscEndNames     The  end of  the resource  names and  the end  of the  resource
                table. This member must be zero.

Type Information

Following are the members in the TTYPEINFO structure:

rtTypeID        The  type identifier  of the  resource. This  integer value  is
                either a  resource-type value or  an offset to  a resource-type
                name. If the high bit in this member is set (0x8000), the value
                is one of the following resource-type values:

                Value           Resource type

                RT_ACCELERATOR  Accelerator table
                RT_BITMAP       Bitmap
                RT_CURSOR       Cursor
                RT_DIALOG       Dialog box
                RT_FONT         Font component
                RT_FONTDIR      Font directory
                RT_GROUP_CURSOR Cursor directory
                RT_GROUP_ICON   Icon directory
                RT_ICON         Icon
                RT_MENU         Menu
                RT_RCDATA       Resource data
                RT_STRING       String table

If the high bit of the value in this member is not set, the value represents an
offset, in bytes relative to the beginning  of the resource table, to a name in
the rscResourceNames member.

rtResourceCount The number of resources of this type in the executable file.
rtReserved      Reserved.
rtNameInfo      An array  of TNAMEINFO structures  containing information about
                individual resources. The  rtResourceCount member specifies the
                number of structures in the array.

Name Information

Following are the members in the TNAMEINFO structure:

rnOffset        An offset to the contents of the resource data (relative to the
                beginning  of the  file). The  offset is  in terms of alignment
                units specified by the rscAlignShift member at the beginning of
                the resource table.
rnLength        The resource length, in bytes.
rnFlags         Whether the  resource is fixed,  preloaded, or shareable.  This
                member can be one or more of the following values:

                Value   Meaning

                0x0010  Resource is movable (MOVEABLE). Otherwise, it is fixed.
                0x0020  Resource can be shared (PURE).
                0x0040  Resource  is  preloaded  (PRELOAD).  Otherwise,  it  is
                        loaded on demand.

rnID            Specifies  or  points  to   the  resource  identifier.  If  the
                identifier  is  an  integer,  the  high  bit  is  set  (8000h).
                Otherwise, it  is an offset  to a resource  string, relative to
                the beginning of the resource table.
rnHandle        Reserved.
rnUsage         Reserved.

Resident-Name Table

The resident-name  table contains strings  that identify exported  functions in
the executable file. As the name  implies, these strings are resident in system
memory and  are never discarded.  The resident-name strings  are case-sensitive
and are not null-terminated. The following  list summarizes the values found in
the resident-name  table (the locations are  relative to the beginning  of each
entry):

Location        Description

00h             The length  of a string.  If there are  no more strings  in the
                table, this value is zero.
01h - xxh       The resident-name  text. This string  is case-sensitive and  is
                not null-terminated.
xxh + 01h       An ordinal number that identifies the string. This number is an
                index into the entry table.

The first string in the resident-name table is the module name.

Module-Reference Table

The  module-reference table  contains offsets  for module  names stored  in the
imported-name table. Each entry in this table is 2 bytes long.

Imported-Name Table

The imported-name table contains the names  of modules that the executable file
imports. Each entry contains two parts: a single byte that specifies the length
of  the  string  and  the  string  itself.  The  strings  in this table are not
null-terminated.

Entry Table

The entry table contains bundles of  entry points from the executable file (the
linker generates each bundle). The numbering system for these ordinal values is
1-based--that is, the  ordinal value corresponding to the  first entry point is
1. The linker generates the densest possible bundles under the restriction that
it cannot reorder the entry points. This restriction is necessary because other
executable  files may  refer to  entry points  within a  given bundle  by their
ordinal  values. The  entry-table data  is organized  by bundle,  each of which
begins with a 2-byte header. The first  byte of the header specifies the number
of entries in the bundle (a value of  00h designates the end of the table). The
second byte specifies whether the corresponding segment is movable or fixed. If
the value in  this byte is 0FFh, the  segment is movable. If the  value in this
byte is 0FEh, the  entry does not refer to a segment  but refers, instead, to a
constant defined within  the module. If the value in  this byte is neither 0FFh
nor 0FEh, it is a segment index.

For  movable segments,  each entry  consists of  6 bytes  and has the following
form:

Loc     Description

00h     Specifies  a  byte  value.  This  value  can  be  a  combination of the
        following bits:

        Bit(s)  Meaning

        0       If this bit is set, the entry is exported.
        1       If this  bit is set,  the segment uses  a global (shared)  data
                segment.
        3-7     If  the  executable  file  contains  code  that  performs  ring
                transitions,  these  bits  specify  the  number  of  words that
                compose the  stack. At the  time of the  ring transition, these
                words must be copied from one ring to the other.

01h     An int 3fh instruction.
03h     The segment number.
04h     The segment offset.

For fixed segments, each entry consists of 3 bytes and has the following form:

Loc     Description

00h     Specifies  a  byte  value.  This  value  can  be  a  combination of the
        following bits:

        Bit(s)  Meaning

        0       If this bit is set, the entry is exported.
        1       If  this bit  is set,  the entry  uses a  global (shared)  data
                segment. (This may be set only for SINGLEDATA library modules.)
        3-7     If  the  executable  file  contains  code  that  performs  ring
                transitions,  these  bits  specify  the  number  of  words that
                compose the  stack. At the  time of the  ring transition, these
                words must be copied from one ring to the other.

01h     Specifies an offset.

Nonresident-Name Table

The nonresident-name table contains strings that identify exported functions in
the executable file. As the name implies, these strings are not always resident
in  system  memory  and  are  discardable.  The  nonresident-name  strings  are
case-sensitive; they are not null-terminated. The following list summarizes the
values  found  in  the  nonresident-name  table  (the  specified  locations are
relative to the beginning of each entry):

Location        Description

00h             The length, in  bytes, of a string. If this  byte is 00h, there
                are no more strings in the table.
01h - xxh       The nonresident-name text. This string is case-sensitive and is
                not null-terminated.
xx + 01h        An ordinal number that is an index to the entry table.

The  first  name  that  appears  in  the  nonresident-name  table is the module
description string (which was specified in the module-definition file).

Code Segments and Relocation Data

Code and data segments follow the Windows header. Some of the code segments may
contain  calls  to  functions  in  other  segments  and may, therefore, require
relocation data to resolve those references.  This relocation data is stored in
a relocation  table that  appears immediately  after the  code or  data in  the
segment. The first 2 bytes in this table specify the number of relocation items
the table contains.  A relocation item is a collection  of bytes specifying the
following information:

  - Address type (segment only, offset only, segment and offset)
  - Relocation type (internal reference, imported ordinal, imported name)
  - Segment number or ordinal identifier (for internal references)
  - Reference-table index or function ordinal number (for imported ordinals)
  - Reference-table index or name-table offset (for imported names)

Each  relocation  item  contains  8  bytes  of  data,  the  first byte of which
specifies one of the following relocation-address types:

Value   Meaning

0       Low byte at the specified offset
2       16-bit selector
3       32-bit pointer
5       16-bit offset
11      48-bit pointer
13      32-bit offset

The second byte specifies one of the following relocation types:

Value   Meaning

0       Internal reference
1       Imported ordinal
2       Imported name
3       OSFIXUP

The third and fourth bytes specify the offset of the relocation item within the
segment.

If the relocation  type is imported ordinal, the fifth  and sixth bytes specify
an index to a module's reference table and the seventh and eighth bytes specify
a function ordinal value.

If the relocation  type is imported name, the fifth  and sixth bytes specify an
index to a module's reference table and the seventh and eighth bytes specify an
offset to an imported-name table.

If  the relocation  type is  internal reference  and the  segment is fixed, the
fifth  byte specifies  the segment  number,  the  sixth byte  is zero,  and the
seventh and  eighth bytes specify an  offset to the segment.  If the relocation
type is internal reference and the segment is movable, the fifth byte specifies
0FFh,  the sixth  byte is  zero; and  the seventh  and eighth  bytes specify an
ordinal value found in the segment's entry table.

